<pre>
KLEE
Notes from Nickolai Zeldovich (6.893)
====

what's the goal of this paper?
    build a tool to test programs (metric: coverage)
    to find bugs (metric: number of bugs found)
    test case for both: GNU Coreutils
    test for correctness by comparing output of different impl of some program

how to find bugs?
    static: analyze the code and find potential problems
    runtime: try to run the code and come up with test cases
    usual trade-off: no false neg's (soundness, finds all bugs) vs false pos's

program analysis
    works well for localized properties
    proving properties for the entire program is tricky
	widely used analysis: type system
	workaround: simplifying assumptions, summarization at function level
	example: avoid divide-by-zero, or avoid SQL inj
	    user-input annotations or special types
	    function summ: track what values could be zero, or came from user
    advantage: might be able to prove the absence of certain classes of bugs
	recent work: can prove a microkernel implements a spec
	(who checks the spec though, or the analysis tool?)
    weakness: false positives
	extreme case: to prove program correct might have to change
		      perfectly correct code to make it easier to prove/analyze

fuzzers
    analyzing code is hard, esp. for complex bugs and large programs
    idea: try to find bugs by sending random input and seeing what breaks
    1. find inputs
	manual but sometimes non-obvious
	e.g. server issuing queries (whois?)
	e.g. desktop OS kernel treating CD or USB data as a file system
    2. write input generation code
	key: make the generation deterministic (use an RNG, save the seed)
	completely random inputs unlikely to get very "deep"
	so write a more targeted input generator, e.g. for web server:
	    issue HTTP-like requests
	    know what an HTTP header looks like
	    understand URL structure?
	time-consuming and you might gloss over important details
    3. feed inputs & watch for bugs
	not clear what's a bug and if you've triggered one
	easiest kinds of bugs to find: crashes, likely due to mem corruption
	hard: bugs that violate app semantics (facebook privacy settings?)
    [4. manually explore the bug]

do fuzzers work?
    advantage: no false positives, if our bug detection rules are good
    advantage: no need to control entire execution env
	can fuzz black-box systems over the network
	no need to recompile into LLVM, etc
    advantage: no need for source code
    disadvantage: hard to cover everything
	can miss bugs because didn't happen to try a particular input
	paper comparison: random tests don't get sufficient coverage
	    intuition: random tests can't generate "structure"
    klee: uses the application's own code to generate structure for test cases
	still not perfect (doesn't prove correctness), but more effective

how does klee work?
    recompile source into LLVM -- bytecode that's a bit higher-level than x86
    bytecode could be executed normally to produce the same result

    klee's execution environment:
	registers, memory locations might not have specific values ("symbolic")
	llvm bytecode interpreted over these symbolic values

    how are these symbolic values represented?
	initial symbolic inputs: completely unconstrained
	other values: expressions in terms of initial inputs
	precise: bitwise accuracy
	     can compute exactly what any value would be for a particular input

    what happens when the klee interpreter wants to run an llvm bytecode op?
	if all operands are concrete: run it as usual
	symbolic non-branches: create a new expression for the result
	symbolic branches:
	    try both!   just add a path constraint that reflects the branch cond.
	example: figure 1
	    what are the initial symbolic inputs?
	    what are the constraints we get at each fork?
	    what is tr trying to match in klee's inputs?  sth. like '[a-z]'
            what is the input that triggers bug? 'tr [ "" ""' 

    what happens when klee hits a bug or sth. else of interest?
	STP solver invoked to produce an example satisfying constraints
	should be able to pick any inputs that satisfy the current path's constr
	lots of optimizations needed to make this efficient
	simplest optimization: on branch, check if it's always true or false

how does klee know what to check?
    understands C semantics and what might cause a crash
	out-of-bounds access, divide-by-zero
	treats these ops as a check/branch first, then a panic() on the err path
    programmers already write assertions, klee uses them as error indications
	assert(a < 100)
	assert(ptr != NULL)
    programmers can write assertions specifically for klee to define bugs

environment modeling
    problem: rest of the world isn't symbolic
    models written in C, run within klee like the rest of the code
    libc runs within klee on top of model (model at syscall level)
    can have files with symbolic data, etc
    can have system calls potentially returning errors at each invocation

what optimizations do they need to make klee run fast?
    break up memory array into per-object arrays
    state compaction
	log-like data structures: easy to fork & append
    query optimization
	constraint independence
	counter-example cache
    state scheduling
	what's their goal here?  coverage
	what's their implied baseline scheduler?  random over reached states
	1: random path selection
	2: coverage-optimized search
	scheduler time slicing, almost like a real OS scheduler

previous tools (buffer overflows, xfi) couldn't get precise object size info
    what happens in klee?  how do they know which object a read/write accesses?
	guess what possible objects could a symbolic pointer be referring to
	fork the state for each possibility
    what happens if they guess wrong?
	likely: try to solve for an example and fail (so then kill state)

does klee have false positives?
    klee tries to reproduce any candidate bugs on unmodified app
	knows all inputs, tries to set up external environment to match
    should be about as good as the defition of a "bug" in the first place
	if you're worried about sec'ty vuln, might not care about null ptr crash

how could you use Klee for 6.828 labs?
    what bugs did you introduce?
    would Klee catch them?

</pre>
